---
layout: post
title:  "Vojo-damaĝo: Road Damage" 
date:   2021-07-31 21:13:21 +0200
categories: project
---
This post explains the project's name here. Vojo-damaĝo is Esperanto. It means Road Damage.

The build process for the project is documented from the [overview]({{
site.xbase }}/overview/) and some information about the project's origins are
given [here]({{ site.xbase }}/about/).

The analyses is given in different sections; these are listed in the menu above;
for completeness, it is repeated here with some explanatory text.

 - [KPI]({{ site.xbase }}/analyses/e2c/) This describes the business being
   investigated and outlines the issues it faces. It uses the code in the source
   directory *e2c/* described in the [overview]({{ site.xbase }}/overview/). It
   is an application of the Generalized Additive Method for time-series.
   
 - [Characteristics]({{ site.xbase }}/analyses/rp/) This is an analysis of the
   features of the assets with their inspection and repairs history. The code is
   the *rp* module in the *br/* directory. This uses a Recursive Partition Tree
   method for analysis.
   
 - [Predictor]({{ site.xbase }}/analyses/br/) This analysis develops the work
   done on the characteristics of the assets to produce a risk classifier for
   them. This is the bulk of the modules in the *br/* directory. It is a
   semi-supervised classification tree method: namely, Gradient Boosted Method.
   It uses a clustering method for imputation and SMOTE for improving the
   predictor. The Predictor is used to improve the design of the Imputer. 
   The Imputer provides a classification system for faults.
   
 - [MTBF]({{ site.xbase }}/analyses/a2d/) In this section, a method to generate
   inspection schedules is developed. It uses a theoretical model of Mean Time
   Between Failures which is then calibrated with road characteristics and 
   recorded faults to provide an effective age for a road; this is then used to 
   schedule inspections and major renewals.

 - [Tools]({{ site.xbase }}/analyses/tools/) This last analysis looks at the
   challenges faced in the project to find tools and use them effectively. It
   quantifies the amount of code, the build and executation times needed to
   produce the different analyses. There are discussions of methodologies and
   statistical tests and advice for Asset managers about change management.
